title: Cygwin CI journey
tags: windows, cygwin, automation, ci
date: 2020-01-28

Setting up Cygwin CI environment for testing one of my projects took more
than fifty trial-and-error attempts - that's why I think it will be useful to
leave some written notes on the issues I've encountered. Here is the end
[result] - GitHub CI running some Makefile tests in Cygwin.

[result]: https://github.com/sio/Makefile.venv/blob/master/.github/workflows/test.yml


## Cygwin gotchas

-   Cygwin installer likes to fail silently, providing only cryptic exit codes
    (`127` or `-1073741571`)

        %CYGWIN_ROOT%\setup.exe --quiet-mode --verbose --no-desktop --download --local-install --no-verify --site %CYGWIN_MIRROR% --local-package-dir %CYGWIN_PACKAGE_CACHE% --root %CYGWIN_ROOT%
        Starting cygwin install, version 2.897
        User has backup/restore rights
        io_stream_cygfile: fopen(/etc/setup/setup.rc) failed 2 No such file or directory
        Current Directory: cache\cygwin-packages
        Could not open service McShield for query, start and stop. McAfee may not be installed, or we don't have access.
        root: d:\a\Makefile.venv\Makefile.venv\cache\cygwin system
        Selected local directory: cache\cygwin-packages
        ##[error]Process completed with exit code -1073741571.

    At least some of those errors can be avoided by providing full absolute
    paths to the installer and any argument values instead of relative
    ones.

    In the end I've switched to Chocolatey to handle the installation for me.
    It's certainly better but still requires calling `setup.exe` to install
    custom packages.

-   Since Cygwin installation and configuration are usually pretty slow (~3
    min), CI setup benefits a lot from caching this step between runs.
    Unfortunately, default GitHub actions for caching can't help with Cygwin
    root, because Windows is pretty hostile to an average Joe trying to make
    symlinks.

    Instead, I've added a separate step that calls `tar --dereference`
    explicitly and leaves only a simple archive for the caching action to
    handle. Please note that tar uses exit code `1` to indicate that
    everything was OK, but some warnings were printed to stderr. Also, order
    of command line arguments matters, at least for `--exclude` values. That
    was pretty unexpected for me.

-   You need to be careful when invoking apps under Cygwin - some environment
    variables may be inherited from `cmd` session. For example, `$PATH`
    will almost certainly point to binaries outside Cygwin root. I found that
    explicitly defining `$PATH` simplifies matters a lot.


## PowerShell/cmd peculiarities

Since host OS is still Windows, you get to encounter all the usual
PowerShell/cmd quirks. I tripped over the fact that PowerShell does not like
double-dashed --GNU-style options, and over weird nested quotes required to
properly combine environment variables and special characters in one value in
cmd.


## GitHub CI

Some of my attempts were just me trying to work around GitHub CI limitations.
For example, dynamically calculating the value of environment variable based
on values of other variables. This looks quite ugly:

```yaml
- name: Use absolute path for CYGWIN_ROOT
  run: echo "::set-env name=CYGWIN_ROOT::${env:GITHUB_WORKSPACE}\${env:CYGWIN_ROOT}"
```

I've also failed at proper syntax for YAML multiline strings more times than
I'm comfortable admitting :)
